Human Environments
------------------

Human and outdoor spaces are messy. They are random, complicated and
dynamic. Operating there is more challenging than in a designed and
predictable assembly line. To complete a variety of tasks, robots need
to understand their location and orientation in space. They need to
sense and understand landmarks, obstacles and free space. In order to do
this in the past, the operating environment needed to be augmented or
instrumented. For example, lines painted on the floor or conduit in the
concrete would be used for directing the robot along paths and hallways.
IR sources, RFID tags or other systems are used for landmarks and by
using stored maps, landmarks would be used for localization. Orientation
could be inferred from the landmarks or if possible a compass.

Systems up to now would instrument the environment to help the robot in
the small confines of rooms and hallways found indoors. Outside the
system might access GPS which can give a rough estimate but lacks the
fidelity needed for indoor navigation. Modifying the environment can be
expensive and intrusive. It might not even be possible for some
locations. Until robots have a very clear understanding for their
surroundings, systems must rely on changing the environment.

To have an effective home robot, the homeowner needs to accept the
augmentation costs or not use the robot. Modern deep learning systems
may bring changes where it is no longer necessary to instrument the
region. Until then, design decisions must include environmental
augmentation.
