Supplementary Reading
---------------------

There are many very good books on robotics. The field is well served by
individuals who want to share their knowledge at many different levels
and viewpoints. The important differences are the goals of the books.
Some texts will focus on presenting the mathematics of articulated
manipulators. Some will want to focus on mobile robot path planning.
Others will want to talk about robot controllers using biological
models. All of these points of view are important.

Below is a list of some texts with a brief description on the focus and
audience:

alligator

- This is a great book that focuses on the algorithms behind autonomy.
It presents a more theoretical treatment of mobile systems and does not
spend much time on the classic kinematic tools like the D-H formalism.
For most schools, this would be a graduate level text based on the
mathematics used in the book although this could be used as an elective
in a senior course if topics were carefully chosen.
:raw-latex:`\cite{Choset:2005:PRM}`

- This is a good shorter book which restricts itself to exactly what the
title implies. The text you are reading follows the outline setout by
Siegwart & Nourbakhsh and both are heavily influenced by Choset’s text.
The material on wheels and the associated kinematics is more in depth
than other subjects in the text. Vision, Navigation, Localization and
Mapping are briefly touched upon but supplementary material is probably
warranted. :raw-latex:`\cite{Siegwart:2004:IAM}`

- This text is similar in topics and level to Autonomous Mobile Robots.
Selection between the two would be based on specific topics of interest.
:raw-latex:`\cite{Dudek:2000:CPM}`

- Braunl’s book surveys the field at a level that a junior in most
engineering programs could easily understand. It has a wealth of
information based on the author’s personal experiences. It describes
many projects and systems at a high level but does not delve deeply into
the topics. If the hardware discussed in the text were more mainstream
or current (Arduino, Raspberry Pi, etc), it would make the text much
more approachable.

- Niku’s text is a great text for the more mechanical side of robotics.
There is a wealth of material on kinematic models, inverse kinematics,
and control. There are well done examples for basic kinematics as well.
:raw-latex:`\cite{niku2010introduction}`
