Introduction and Overview
-------------------------

Gazebo is a multi-robot simulator for outdoor environments. It is
capable of simulating a population of robots, sensors and objects in
three-dimensional world.It generates both realistic sensor feedback and
physically plausible interaction between objects (it includes an
accurate simulation of rigid-body physics). The following lists a few or
the primary features offered by Gazebo. Access multiple physics engines
including ODE and Bullet Direct control over physics engine parameters
including accuracy, performance, and dynamic properties for each
simulated model. Construct a 3D model of a building within the Gazebo
UI, without writing a line of code. Utilizing OGRE, Gazebo provides
realistic rendering of environments. State-of-the-art GPU shaders
generate correct lighting and shadows for improved realism. Generate
sensor information from laser range finders, 2D cameras, Kinect style
sensors, contact sensors, and RFID sensor. Many robots are provided
including PR2, Pioneer2 DX, iRobot Create, TurtleBot, generic robot arms
and grippers. Access to many objects from simple shapes to terrain.
Support for ROS and Player. API for custom interfaces. Develop custom
plugins for robot model control, interfacing with world components
Provides direct control to all aspects of the simulation engine
including the physics engine, graphics libraries, and sensor generation
Run Gazebo on remote servers interface to Gazebo through socket-based
message passing using Google Protobufs. A lightweight QT based graphical
interface provides users with direct control over many simulation
parameters. View and navigate through a running simulation. Import
meshes from many sources using Gazeboâ€™s built in Collada reader
Community supported help through a mailing list and wiki Reply human
motion capture data in a running simulation

